README.md, before:

#A genome of a tardigrade --- Horizontal gene transfer or contamination

This repository comprises data set and scripts for our analysis of the manuscript [Boothby, *et al.* (2015)](#boothby-et-al-2015).

##Content

- [Figures](#figures)
- [Material and Methods](#methods)
  - [GitHub repository](#github-repository)
  - [Data set](#data-set)
  - [Programs](#programs)
  - [Trimming of the input data](#trimming-of-the-input-data)
  - [Estimation of the genome size](#estimation-of-the-genome-size)
  - [Counting and Filtering bases on kmers](#counting-and-filtering-bases-on-kmers)
  - [Long Read Assembly](#long-read-assembly)
  - [Assembly Annotation](#assembly-annotation)
  - [Assembly Comparison](#assembly-comparison)
- [References](#references)

##Figures

![Image](https://cdn.rawgit.com/greatfireball/hypsibius_genome_revised/master/supplement/figures/supplementary_figure_1.svg)

**Figure S1: kmer Analysis** *The plots depict the kmer
  distribution for each library before (black line) and after
  classification into 'trusted' (green line) and 'untrusted' kmers
  (red line).*

![Image](https://cdn.rawgit.com/greatfireball/hypsibius_genome_revised/master/supplement/figures/supplementary_figure_2.svg)

**Figure S2: Assembly Feature Comparisons** *A) Per-site coverage
  of trusted and untrusted assembly based on mappings of Moleculo
  reads. Contigs from the untrusted assembly generally don't share the
  coverage of the trusted, most likley nuclear, genome. B) GC content
  of trusted and untrusted assembly estimated using sliding window
  approach. The untrusted assembly contains multiple peaks pointing
  towards contig subpopulations with different GC content. C) Per-site
  variability of trusted und untrusted assembly which can serve as
  ploidy proxy. The untrusted variability spectrum seems distored and
  contains a multiude of different peaks while the trusted assembly
  shows a typical diploid spectrum. D) Length distribution of
  intergenetic regions. Intragenetic regions are significantly larger
  in the trusted assembly than in the trusted.*

  ![Image](https://cdn.rawgit.com/greatfireball/hypsibius_genome_revised/master/supplement/figures/supplementary_figure_3.svg)

**Figure S3: Unknown Bacterial Genome** *Circular map of an
  unknown bacterial genome probably belonging to the Chitinophagaceae
  drawn with CGView. Tracks 1 and 2 (blue) indicate GeneMark-S annotated
  genes on forward and reverse strand. Track 3 (red) visualizes
  regions of homology to a set of 30,844 Chitinophagaceae proteins
  downloaded from UniProtKB. Track 4 (green) shows homology between
  GeneMark-S predicted proteins and the published protein set of
  [Boothby, *et al.* (2015)](#boothby-et-al-2015)*

##Methods
###GitHub repository

All script files are available from our GitHub repository
https://github.com/greatfireball/hypsibius_genome_revised/.

###Data set
We used the data set provided by [Boothby, *et al.* (2015)](#boothby-et-al-2015) and downloaded
the data from http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/. A
complete list of the used input files are given in the following table:

**Table S1:** *Data set used for our analysis including checksums for compressed and decompressed file content.*

| Filename and location | Modification time  | Size in Bytes  | MD5 check sum | MD5 check sum decompressed |
|:---------------------:|:------------------:|---------------:|:-------------:|:--------------------------:|
| [tg.genome.fsa.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/tg.genome.fsa.gz) | 2015-11-25T01:34:44Z | 72215266 | b8bd39390ef35dd43d1cda1ca6944d5a | 77be374d28b91232c0810cc4d3cd37b9 |
| [tg.default.maker.proteins.final.fasta.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/tg.default.maker.proteins.final.fasta.gz) | 2015-12-02T23:43:44Z | 12359873 | 2de12e5d28d6dba121973db2071565d9 | 1ad17cfa9e6c26e552fa8048c6ee90af |
| [short\_reads/TG-300-SIPE\_1\_sequence.txt](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-300-SIPE_1_sequence.txt) | 2015-11-30T21:48:51Z | 11526955725 | c16b5442c9893b6feaa3aa81a39eefcd | c16b5442c9893b6feaa3aa81a39eefcd |
| [short\_reads/TG-300-SIPE\_2\_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-300-SIPE_2_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-11-30T21:52:41Z | 3920224257 | 3bea43d66d71926fb620966d281598c6 | bc8423d4fe4275863e0809445ffd21ce |
| [short\_reads/TG-500-SIPE\_1\_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-500-SIPE_1_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-12-01T05:32:05Z | 2738243219 | da8b15d388961938584343f8926f7b24 | eee7363557ccb1fb0fa75ebe55ae7ee5 |
| [short\_reads/TG-500-SIPE\_2\_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-500-SIPE_2_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-12-01T05:35:15Z | 2805269168 | aa8c2c345484b9464d272e0993d6968b | 325d74bbafd9b6019609e2fd33eca260 |
| [short_reads/TG-800-SIPE_1_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-800-SIPE_1_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-12-01T05:36:55Z | 2155735304 | 6e9cce1a27000ae2b4f87181a976df92 | a85568ef53979c367870eee6390f2ced |
| [short\_reads/TG-800-SIPE\_2\_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-800-SIPE_2_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-12-01T05:37:46Z | 2058207374 | ccf097cf4f13bb5cbc5a8e002250093d | 4a4cc02c2f289d59c300810fb621eb28 |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-01\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-01_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:50:17Z | 825877986 | 86e75544f2d6ef5185bae419bbd2a4b2 | bace73ed4750b33fc144e56c155454ab |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-02\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-02_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:51:34Z | 835283315 | 4dea3e39a7a25059a6ebbd5588e845b2 | cb83c39f9a385f0b4fd1e507cfe40ff1 |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-03\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-03_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:52:51Z | 847867943 | 16276b6ef8dea90721eb67ac21d616e6 | 51d4ce37668684b4aa25e061fb95b4ef |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-04\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-04_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:56:08Z | 859746540 | 3364040445c7377c9323f82d98a2258c | dbe06ec4248199f416bb1d02ff1e65f5 |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-05\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-05_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:56:51Z | 854266597 | 7995559df803ef0de0250f1bfac71f1a | 98d30f3ceb813d9f53c6df2ed1fa2239

###Programs

**Table S2:** *List of all programs including the version numbers and references to publications or websites used for the data processing and analysis*

| Programname  | Version  | Reference |
|:------------:|:--------:|:----------|
Allpath-LG     | v50378   | [Gnerre, *et al.* (2011)](#gnerre-et-al-2011), [Ribeiro, *et al.* (2012)](#ribeiro-et-al-2015) |
BEDTools       | v2.20.1  |  [Quinlan and Hall (2010)](#quinlan-an-hall-2010) |
bioperl        | v1.69.1  | [Stajich, *et al.* (2002)](#stajich-et-al-2002) |
bowtie2        | v2.2.2   | [Langmead and Salzberg (2012)](#langmead-and-salzberg-2012) |
bwa            | v0.7.10  | [Li and Durbin (2009a)](#li-and-durbin-2009a), [Li and Durbin (2010)](#li-and-durbin-2010) |
CGView         | v1.0     | [Grin and Linke (2011)](#grin-and-linke-2011) |
Falcon         | v0.4.0   | https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/falcon |
Genemark-S     | v4.3.2   | [Besemer, *et al.* (2001)](#besemer-et-al-2001) |
Genemark-ET    | v4.29    | [Lomsadze, *et al.* (2014)](#lomsadze-et-al-2014) |
Jellyfish      | v2.2.4   | [Marçais and Kingsford (2011)](#marçais-and-kingsford-2011) |
Perl           | v5.14.2  | https://www.perl.org/ |
samtools       | v1.1     | [Li, *et al.* (2009b)](#li-et-al-2009b), [Li (2011a)](#li-2011a), [Li (2011b)](#li-2011b) |
skewer         | v0.1.124 | [Jiang, *et al.* (2014)](#jiang-et-al-2014) |
`sm` R package | v2.2-5.4 | [Bowman and Azzalini (2014)](#bowman-and-azzalini-2014) |
Trimmomatic    | v0.3.5   | [Bolger, *et al.* (2014)](#bolger-et-al-2014) |

###Trimming of the input data

Short reads were trimmed with skewer.

```bash
skewer -m pe -q 30 -Q 30 -l 60 -t 64 \
   HD_gen.il_L[358]*00_P1.fastq HD_gen.il_L[358]*00_P2.fastq
```

Long reads were trimmed with Trimmomatic.

```bash
java -jar trimmomatic-0.35.jar SE -phred33 HD_gen.mo_L[12345]*.fastq \
   HD_gen.mo_L[12345]*.trimmed.fastq \
   ILLUMINACLIP:adapter.fa:2:30:10 LEADING:30 TRAILING:30 MINLEN:250
```

###Estimation of the genome size

The genome size was estimated by the standalone error
correction pipeline of Allpaths-LG.

```bash
./scripts/genome_size_estimation.sh
```

###Counting and Filtering bases on kmers

The kmers of all libraries where counted using the software jellyfish
[Marcais and Kingsford (2011)](#references):

```bash
./scripts/count_kmers.sh
```

The resulting kmer hashes need to be dumped and converted to a hash
utilized later during the filtering step. This step and the following
required `> 200 GB` of memory and was performed by the perl
script `prepare_filter_fastq_by_valid_kmers.pl`.

```bash
./scripts/dump_kmers.sh
```

The generated hash was used to filter individual libraries. Therefore,
we have written the perl script
`filter_fastq_by_valid_kmers_reduced.pl`.

```bash
./scripts/filter_input_data.sh
```

The filtered data sets are classified as 'trusted' or 'untrusted'
based on the 'trusted' kmer content. Reads with at least
`95 %` 'trusted' kmers content are called 'trusted'
while reads below that threshold are classified as 'untrusted'.

```bash
./scripts/extract_classified_sequences.sh
```

###Long Read Assembly

Trusted and untrusted Moleculo reads were assembled with Falcon.

```bash
fc_run.py trusted.falcon.cfg
fc_run.py untrusted.falcon.cfg
```

See configuration files for parameter details.

###Assembly Annotation
The trusted assembly was annotated with GeneMark-ES.

```bash
gmes_petap.pl --sequence HD_gen.trusted.fasta \
   --ES --cores 64
```

The untrusted assembly was annotated with GeneMark-S

```bash
gmsn.pl --fnn --faa --species HD --gm \
   --name HD HD_gen.unsupported.fasta
```
All annotation GFT files and corresponding CDS/protein sequences are located in the folder [annotation](annotation).

The largest untrusted sequence was visualized using the CGView Server.

###Assembly Comparison

Trusted and untrusted assemblies were compared using GC content,
mapping coverage, per-site variability and gene spacing.

####GC content
The GC content was determined for all contigs `>= 1 kbp` using a sliding window of
`1 kbp` and a stepsize of `100 bp` by the
perl script `sliding_window_gc.pl`.

```bash
mkdir cg
cd cg

for i in ../assemblies/HD*.fasta
do
   ../scripts/sliding_window_gc/sliding_window_gc.pl
      --in "$i" \
      --min-length 1000
      > $(basename "$i").sliding_gc.tsv
done
```

####Mapping Coverage
The mapping coverage was determined by remapping of the short or
longreads onto the assembled contig. For the short read libraries, we
used `bowtie2` as mapper. Long read libraries were mapped by
`bwa`. The per-base coverage was determined by bedtools.

```bash
./scripts/determine_mapping_coverage.sh
```

####Per-site Variability
The per-site variability was calculated by counting bases covering each
site of the two assemblies. Each base that occurred at a given site with
a minimum frequency of `0.2` was taken into account and a histogram of
all these base frequencies was created.

####Gene Spacing
Length of the intragenetic regions were directly extracted from the
GeneMark-S/ES annotation files.

```bash
gtf2genespacing.pl --gtf HD_gen.supported.gtf
gtf2genespacing.pl --gtf HD_gen.unsupported.gtf
```

All resulting data sets were compared, tested and visualized using the
GNU R package `sm`.

##References
######Besemer, *et al.* (2001)
Besemer, J.; Lomsadze, A. & Borodovsky, M. GeneMarkS: a self-training method for prediction of gene starts in microbial genomes. Implications for finding sequence motifs in regulatory regions. Nucleic Acids Res, 2001, 29, 2607-2618

######Bolger, *et al.* (2014)
Bolger, A. M.; Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics, 2014, 30, 2114-2120

######Boothby, *et al.* (2015)
Boothby, T. C.; Tenlen, J. R.; Smith, F. W.; Wang, J. R.; Patanella, K. A.; Osborne Nishimura, E.; Tintori, S. C.; Li, Q.; Jones, C. D.; Yandell, M.; Messina, D. N.; Glasscock, J. & Goldstein, B. Evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer from the draft genome of a tardigrade Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015

######Bowman and Azzalini (2014)
Bowman, A. W. & Azzalini, A. R package sm: nonparametric smoothing methods (version 2.2-5.4) 2014

######Gnerre, *et al.* (2011)
Gnerre, S.; Maccallum, I.; Przybylski, D.; Ribeiro, F. J.; Burton, J. N.; Walker, B. J.; Sharpe, T.; Hall, G.; Shea, T. P.; Sykes, S.; Berlin, A. M.; Aird, D.; Costello, M.; Daza, R.; Williams, L.; Nicol, R.; Gnirke, A.; Nusbaum, C.; Lander, E. S. & Jaffe, D. B. High-quality draft assemblies of mammalian genomes from massively parallel sequence data. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2011, 108, 1513-1518

######Grin and Linke (2011)
Grin, I. & Linke, D. GCView: the genomic context viewer for protein homology searches. Nucleic Acids Res, 2011, 39, W353-W356

######Jiang, *et al.* (2014)
Jiang, H.; Lei, R.; Ding, S.-W. & Zhu, S. Skewer: a fast and accurate adapter trimmer for next-generation sequencing paired-end reads. BMC Bioinformatics, 2014, 15, 182

######Langmead and Salzberg (2012)
Langmead, B. & Salzberg, S. L. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Methods, 2012, 9, 357-359

######Li and Durbin (2009a)
Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics, 2009, 25, 1754-1760

######Li, *et al.* (2009b)
Li, H.; Handsaker, B.; Wysoker, A.; Fennell, T.; Ruan, J.; Homer, N.; Marth, G.; Abecasis, G.; Durbin, R. & 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics, 2009, 25, 2078-2079

######Li and Durbin (2010)
Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics, 2010, 26, 589-595

######Li (2011a)
Li, H. A statistical framework for SNP calling, mutation discovery, association mapping and population genetical parameter estimation from sequencing data. Bioinformatics, 2011, 27, 2987-2993

######Li (2011b)
Li, H. Improving SNP discovery by base alignment quality. Bioinformatics, 2011, 27, 1157-1158

######Lomsadze, *et al.* (2014)
Lomsadze, A.; Burns, P. D. & Borodovsky, M. Integration of mapped RNA-Seq reads into automatic training of eukaryotic gene finding algorithm. Nucleic Acids Res, 2014, 42, e119

######Marçais and Kingsford (2011)
Marçais, G. & Kingsford, C. A fast, lock-free approach for efficient parallel counting of occurrences of k-mers Bioinformatics, 2011, 27, 764-770

######Quinlan and Hall (2010)
Quinlan, A. R. & Hall, I. M. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. Bioinformatics, 2010, 26, 841-842

######Ribeiro, *et al.* (2012)
Ribeiro, F. J.; Przybylski, D.; Yin, S.; Sharpe, T.; Gnerre, S.; Abouelleil, A.; Berlin, A. M.; Montmayeur, A.; Shea, T. P.; Walker, B. J.; Young, S. K.; Russ, C.; Nusbaum, C.; MacCallum, I. & Jaffe, D. B. Finished bacterial genomes from shotgun sequence data. Genome Res, 2012, 22, 2270-2277

######Stajich, *et al.* (2002)
Stajich, J. E.; Block, D.; Boulez, K.; Brenner, S. E.; Chervitz, S. A.; Dagdigian, C.; Fuellen, G.; Gilbert, J. G. R.; Korf, I.; Lapp, H.; Lehväslaiho, H.; Matsalla, C.; Mungall, C. J.; Osborne, B. I.; Pocock, M. R.; Schattner, P.; Senger, M.; Stein, L. D.; Stupka, E.; Wilkinson, M. D. & Birney, E. The Bioperl toolkit: Perl modules for the life sciences. Genome Res, 2002, 12, 1611-1618

Commit message:

Added a link to the assembly files

README.md, after:

#A genome of a tardigrade --- Horizontal gene transfer or contamination

This repository comprises data set and scripts for our analysis of the manuscript [Boothby, *et al.* (2015)](#boothby-et-al-2015).

##Content

- [Figures](#figures)
- [Material and Methods](#methods)
  - [GitHub repository](#github-repository)
  - [Data set](#data-set)
  - [Programs](#programs)
  - [Trimming of the input data](#trimming-of-the-input-data)
  - [Estimation of the genome size](#estimation-of-the-genome-size)
  - [Counting and Filtering bases on kmers](#counting-and-filtering-bases-on-kmers)
  - [Long Read Assembly](#long-read-assembly)
  - [Assembly Annotation](#assembly-annotation)
  - [Assembly Comparison](#assembly-comparison)
- [References](#references)

##Figures

![Image](https://cdn.rawgit.com/greatfireball/hypsibius_genome_revised/master/supplement/figures/supplementary_figure_1.svg)

**Figure S1: kmer Analysis** *The plots depict the kmer
  distribution for each library before (black line) and after
  classification into 'trusted' (green line) and 'untrusted' kmers
  (red line).*

![Image](https://cdn.rawgit.com/greatfireball/hypsibius_genome_revised/master/supplement/figures/supplementary_figure_2.svg)

**Figure S2: Assembly Feature Comparisons** *A) Per-site coverage
  of trusted and untrusted assembly based on mappings of Moleculo
  reads. Contigs from the untrusted assembly generally don't share the
  coverage of the trusted, most likley nuclear, genome. B) GC content
  of trusted and untrusted assembly estimated using sliding window
  approach. The untrusted assembly contains multiple peaks pointing
  towards contig subpopulations with different GC content. C) Per-site
  variability of trusted und untrusted assembly which can serve as
  ploidy proxy. The untrusted variability spectrum seems distored and
  contains a multiude of different peaks while the trusted assembly
  shows a typical diploid spectrum. D) Length distribution of
  intergenetic regions. Intragenetic regions are significantly larger
  in the trusted assembly than in the trusted.*

  ![Image](https://cdn.rawgit.com/greatfireball/hypsibius_genome_revised/master/supplement/figures/supplementary_figure_3.svg)

**Figure S3: Unknown Bacterial Genome** *Circular map of an
  unknown bacterial genome probably belonging to the Chitinophagaceae
  drawn with CGView. Tracks 1 and 2 (blue) indicate GeneMark-S annotated
  genes on forward and reverse strand. Track 3 (red) visualizes
  regions of homology to a set of 30,844 Chitinophagaceae proteins
  downloaded from UniProtKB. Track 4 (green) shows homology between
  GeneMark-S predicted proteins and the published protein set of
  [Boothby, *et al.* (2015)](#boothby-et-al-2015)*

##Methods
###GitHub repository

All script files are available from our GitHub repository
https://github.com/greatfireball/hypsibius_genome_revised/.

###Data set
We used the data set provided by [Boothby, *et al.* (2015)](#boothby-et-al-2015) and downloaded
the data from http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/. A
complete list of the used input files are given in the following table:

**Table S1:** *Data set used for our analysis including checksums for compressed and decompressed file content.*

| Filename and location | Modification time  | Size in Bytes  | MD5 check sum | MD5 check sum decompressed |
|:---------------------:|:------------------:|---------------:|:-------------:|:--------------------------:|
| [tg.genome.fsa.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/tg.genome.fsa.gz) | 2015-11-25T01:34:44Z | 72215266 | b8bd39390ef35dd43d1cda1ca6944d5a | 77be374d28b91232c0810cc4d3cd37b9 |
| [tg.default.maker.proteins.final.fasta.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/tg.default.maker.proteins.final.fasta.gz) | 2015-12-02T23:43:44Z | 12359873 | 2de12e5d28d6dba121973db2071565d9 | 1ad17cfa9e6c26e552fa8048c6ee90af |
| [short\_reads/TG-300-SIPE\_1\_sequence.txt](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-300-SIPE_1_sequence.txt) | 2015-11-30T21:48:51Z | 11526955725 | c16b5442c9893b6feaa3aa81a39eefcd | c16b5442c9893b6feaa3aa81a39eefcd |
| [short\_reads/TG-300-SIPE\_2\_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-300-SIPE_2_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-11-30T21:52:41Z | 3920224257 | 3bea43d66d71926fb620966d281598c6 | bc8423d4fe4275863e0809445ffd21ce |
| [short\_reads/TG-500-SIPE\_1\_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-500-SIPE_1_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-12-01T05:32:05Z | 2738243219 | da8b15d388961938584343f8926f7b24 | eee7363557ccb1fb0fa75ebe55ae7ee5 |
| [short\_reads/TG-500-SIPE\_2\_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-500-SIPE_2_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-12-01T05:35:15Z | 2805269168 | aa8c2c345484b9464d272e0993d6968b | 325d74bbafd9b6019609e2fd33eca260 |
| [short_reads/TG-800-SIPE_1_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-800-SIPE_1_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-12-01T05:36:55Z | 2155735304 | 6e9cce1a27000ae2b4f87181a976df92 | a85568ef53979c367870eee6390f2ced |
| [short\_reads/TG-800-SIPE\_2\_sequence.txt.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/short_reads/TG-800-SIPE_2_sequence.txt.gz) | 2015-12-01T05:37:46Z | 2058207374 | ccf097cf4f13bb5cbc5a8e002250093d | 4a4cc02c2f289d59c300810fb621eb28 |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-01\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-01_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:50:17Z | 825877986 | 86e75544f2d6ef5185bae419bbd2a4b2 | bace73ed4750b33fc144e56c155454ab |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-02\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-02_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:51:34Z | 835283315 | 4dea3e39a7a25059a6ebbd5588e845b2 | cb83c39f9a385f0b4fd1e507cfe40ff1 |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-03\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-03_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:52:51Z | 847867943 | 16276b6ef8dea90721eb67ac21d616e6 | 51d4ce37668684b4aa25e061fb95b4ef |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-04\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-04_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:56:08Z | 859746540 | 3364040445c7377c9323f82d98a2258c | dbe06ec4248199f416bb1d02ff1e65f5 |
| [moleculo\_reads/LR6000049-DNA\_A01-LRAAD-05\_LongRead.fastq.gz](http://weatherby.genetics.utah.edu/seq_transf/moleculo_reads/LR6000049-DNA_A01-LRAAD-05_LongRead.fastq.gz) | 2015-11-30T17:56:51Z | 854266597 | 7995559df803ef0de0250f1bfac71f1a | 98d30f3ceb813d9f53c6df2ed1fa2239

###Programs

**Table S2:** *List of all programs including the version numbers and references to publications or websites used for the data processing and analysis*

| Programname  | Version  | Reference |
|:------------:|:--------:|:----------|
Allpath-LG     | v50378   | [Gnerre, *et al.* (2011)](#gnerre-et-al-2011), [Ribeiro, *et al.* (2012)](#ribeiro-et-al-2015) |
BEDTools       | v2.20.1  |  [Quinlan and Hall (2010)](#quinlan-an-hall-2010) |
bioperl        | v1.69.1  | [Stajich, *et al.* (2002)](#stajich-et-al-2002) |
bowtie2        | v2.2.2   | [Langmead and Salzberg (2012)](#langmead-and-salzberg-2012) |
bwa            | v0.7.10  | [Li and Durbin (2009a)](#li-and-durbin-2009a), [Li and Durbin (2010)](#li-and-durbin-2010) |
CGView         | v1.0     | [Grin and Linke (2011)](#grin-and-linke-2011) |
Falcon         | v0.4.0   | https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/falcon |
Genemark-S     | v4.3.2   | [Besemer, *et al.* (2001)](#besemer-et-al-2001) |
Genemark-ET    | v4.29    | [Lomsadze, *et al.* (2014)](#lomsadze-et-al-2014) |
Jellyfish      | v2.2.4   | [Marçais and Kingsford (2011)](#marçais-and-kingsford-2011) |
Perl           | v5.14.2  | https://www.perl.org/ |
samtools       | v1.1     | [Li, *et al.* (2009b)](#li-et-al-2009b), [Li (2011a)](#li-2011a), [Li (2011b)](#li-2011b) |
skewer         | v0.1.124 | [Jiang, *et al.* (2014)](#jiang-et-al-2014) |
`sm` R package | v2.2-5.4 | [Bowman and Azzalini (2014)](#bowman-and-azzalini-2014) |
Trimmomatic    | v0.3.5   | [Bolger, *et al.* (2014)](#bolger-et-al-2014) |

###Trimming of the input data

Short reads were trimmed with skewer.

```bash
skewer -m pe -q 30 -Q 30 -l 60 -t 64 \
   HD_gen.il_L[358]*00_P1.fastq HD_gen.il_L[358]*00_P2.fastq
```

Long reads were trimmed with Trimmomatic.

```bash
java -jar trimmomatic-0.35.jar SE -phred33 HD_gen.mo_L[12345]*.fastq \
   HD_gen.mo_L[12345]*.trimmed.fastq \
   ILLUMINACLIP:adapter.fa:2:30:10 LEADING:30 TRAILING:30 MINLEN:250
```

###Estimation of the genome size

The genome size was estimated by the standalone error
correction pipeline of Allpaths-LG.

```bash
./scripts/genome_size_estimation.sh
```

###Counting and Filtering bases on kmers

The kmers of all libraries where counted using the software jellyfish
[Marcais and Kingsford (2011)](#references):

```bash
./scripts/count_kmers.sh
```

The resulting kmer hashes need to be dumped and converted to a hash
utilized later during the filtering step. This step and the following
required `> 200 GB` of memory and was performed by the perl
script `prepare_filter_fastq_by_valid_kmers.pl`.

```bash
./scripts/dump_kmers.sh
```

The generated hash was used to filter individual libraries. Therefore,
we have written the perl script
`filter_fastq_by_valid_kmers_reduced.pl`.

```bash
./scripts/filter_input_data.sh
```

The filtered data sets are classified as 'trusted' or 'untrusted'
based on the 'trusted' kmer content. Reads with at least
`95 %` 'trusted' kmers content are called 'trusted'
while reads below that threshold are classified as 'untrusted'.

```bash
./scripts/extract_classified_sequences.sh
```

###Long Read Assembly

Trusted and untrusted Moleculo reads were assembled with Falcon.

```bash
fc_run.py trusted.falcon.cfg
fc_run.py untrusted.falcon.cfg
```

See configuration files for parameter details.

The final assembly files for both sets are are located in the folder [assemblies](assemblies).

###Assembly Annotation
The trusted assembly was annotated with GeneMark-ES.

```bash
gmes_petap.pl --sequence HD_gen.trusted.fasta \
   --ES --cores 64
```

The untrusted assembly was annotated with GeneMark-S

```bash
gmsn.pl --fnn --faa --species HD --gm \
   --name HD HD_gen.unsupported.fasta
```
All annotation GFT files and corresponding CDS/protein sequences are located in the folder [annotation](annotation).

The largest untrusted sequence was visualized using the CGView Server.

###Assembly Comparison

Trusted and untrusted assemblies were compared using GC content,
mapping coverage, per-site variability and gene spacing.

####GC content
The GC content was determined for all contigs `>= 1 kbp` using a sliding window of
`1 kbp` and a stepsize of `100 bp` by the
perl script `sliding_window_gc.pl`.

```bash
mkdir cg
cd cg

for i in ../assemblies/HD*.fasta
do
   ../scripts/sliding_window_gc/sliding_window_gc.pl
      --in "$i" \
      --min-length 1000
      > $(basename "$i").sliding_gc.tsv
done
```

####Mapping Coverage
The mapping coverage was determined by remapping of the short or
longreads onto the assembled contig. For the short read libraries, we
used `bowtie2` as mapper. Long read libraries were mapped by
`bwa`. The per-base coverage was determined by bedtools.

```bash
./scripts/determine_mapping_coverage.sh
```

####Per-site Variability
The per-site variability was calculated by counting bases covering each
site of the two assemblies. Each base that occurred at a given site with
a minimum frequency of `0.2` was taken into account and a histogram of
all these base frequencies was created.

####Gene Spacing
Length of the intragenetic regions were directly extracted from the
GeneMark-S/ES annotation files.

```bash
gtf2genespacing.pl --gtf HD_gen.supported.gtf
gtf2genespacing.pl --gtf HD_gen.unsupported.gtf
```

All resulting data sets were compared, tested and visualized using the
GNU R package `sm`.

##References
######Besemer, *et al.* (2001)
Besemer, J.; Lomsadze, A. & Borodovsky, M. GeneMarkS: a self-training method for prediction of gene starts in microbial genomes. Implications for finding sequence motifs in regulatory regions. Nucleic Acids Res, 2001, 29, 2607-2618

######Bolger, *et al.* (2014)
Bolger, A. M.; Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics, 2014, 30, 2114-2120

######Boothby, *et al.* (2015)
Boothby, T. C.; Tenlen, J. R.; Smith, F. W.; Wang, J. R.; Patanella, K. A.; Osborne Nishimura, E.; Tintori, S. C.; Li, Q.; Jones, C. D.; Yandell, M.; Messina, D. N.; Glasscock, J. & Goldstein, B. Evidence for extensive horizontal gene transfer from the draft genome of a tardigrade Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015

######Bowman and Azzalini (2014)
Bowman, A. W. & Azzalini, A. R package sm: nonparametric smoothing methods (version 2.2-5.4) 2014

######Gnerre, *et al.* (2011)
Gnerre, S.; Maccallum, I.; Przybylski, D.; Ribeiro, F. J.; Burton, J. N.; Walker, B. J.; Sharpe, T.; Hall, G.; Shea, T. P.; Sykes, S.; Berlin, A. M.; Aird, D.; Costello, M.; Daza, R.; Williams, L.; Nicol, R.; Gnirke, A.; Nusbaum, C.; Lander, E. S. & Jaffe, D. B. High-quality draft assemblies of mammalian genomes from massively parallel sequence data. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2011, 108, 1513-1518

######Grin and Linke (2011)
Grin, I. & Linke, D. GCView: the genomic context viewer for protein homology searches. Nucleic Acids Res, 2011, 39, W353-W356

######Jiang, *et al.* (2014)
Jiang, H.; Lei, R.; Ding, S.-W. & Zhu, S. Skewer: a fast and accurate adapter trimmer for next-generation sequencing paired-end reads. BMC Bioinformatics, 2014, 15, 182

######Langmead and Salzberg (2012)
Langmead, B. & Salzberg, S. L. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Methods, 2012, 9, 357-359

######Li and Durbin (2009a)
Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics, 2009, 25, 1754-1760

######Li, *et al.* (2009b)
Li, H.; Handsaker, B.; Wysoker, A.; Fennell, T.; Ruan, J.; Homer, N.; Marth, G.; Abecasis, G.; Durbin, R. & 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics, 2009, 25, 2078-2079

######Li and Durbin (2010)
Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics, 2010, 26, 589-595

######Li (2011a)
Li, H. A statistical framework for SNP calling, mutation discovery, association mapping and population genetical parameter estimation from sequencing data. Bioinformatics, 2011, 27, 2987-2993

######Li (2011b)
Li, H. Improving SNP discovery by base alignment quality. Bioinformatics, 2011, 27, 1157-1158

######Lomsadze, *et al.* (2014)
Lomsadze, A.; Burns, P. D. & Borodovsky, M. Integration of mapped RNA-Seq reads into automatic training of eukaryotic gene finding algorithm. Nucleic Acids Res, 2014, 42, e119

######Marçais and Kingsford (2011)
Marçais, G. & Kingsford, C. A fast, lock-free approach for efficient parallel counting of occurrences of k-mers Bioinformatics, 2011, 27, 764-770

######Quinlan and Hall (2010)
Quinlan, A. R. & Hall, I. M. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. Bioinformatics, 2010, 26, 841-842

######Ribeiro, *et al.* (2012)
Ribeiro, F. J.; Przybylski, D.; Yin, S.; Sharpe, T.; Gnerre, S.; Abouelleil, A.; Berlin, A. M.; Montmayeur, A.; Shea, T. P.; Walker, B. J.; Young, S. K.; Russ, C.; Nusbaum, C.; MacCallum, I. & Jaffe, D. B. Finished bacterial genomes from shotgun sequence data. Genome Res, 2012, 22, 2270-2277

######Stajich, *et al.* (2002)
Stajich, J. E.; Block, D.; Boulez, K.; Brenner, S. E.; Chervitz, S. A.; Dagdigian, C.; Fuellen, G.; Gilbert, J. G. R.; Korf, I.; Lapp, H.; Lehväslaiho, H.; Matsalla, C.; Mungall, C. J.; Osborne, B. I.; Pocock, M. R.; Schattner, P.; Senger, M.; Stein, L. D.; Stupka, E.; Wilkinson, M. D. & Birney, E. The Bioperl toolkit: Perl modules for the life sciences. Genome Res, 2002, 12, 1611-1618
